All right, well,
we talked about the hard way to
accomplish mean variance optimization.
And I promised you an easier way and
here's the easier way,
it actually really couldn't be easier.
The easy way to accomplish mean
variance optimization is to just take
the value-weighted market index to
be an efficient portfolio, okay?
So take the value-weighted market index
such as the S&P 500, that's pretty much
a value-weighted market index here in
the US, to be an efficient portfolio.
Okay, now this might sound like
just throwing up your hands like,
okay, forget it.
I'm not going to try to optimize.
But actually there are some
good economic reasons to
believe that a value-weighted market
index, the broader the index,
the better is going to be at
least reasonably efficient, okay.
And so let me just sort of
sketch what those reasons are.
Once again if you want to see more math,
it's easy to look it up.
I'm just going to sketch it for you here.
Here's one reason to believe that.
And this is that there's a long
academic literature on this point.
Reason number one is, if you have
two efficient portfolios, right?
So there's two portfolios, each of which
has this nice property that it's got
the minimum risk for its expected return.
And then you combine those portfolios,
the combined portfolio Is
also inefficient portfolio.
Mathematically that works out, okay?
So, if and I know it's a big if here, but
if everybody in the world
holds an efficient portfolio,
then everybody's portfolio put together
is an efficient portfolio, okay?
Well, everybody's portfolio put together
is essentially the value-weighted
market index, right?
That's sort of what it is.
It's just all of the assets put together
according to their sizes, right?
So you put all that together.
Well, that is everyone's
portfolio put together.
And so if everyone has a mean
variance efficient portfolio,
then their sum is going to
be mean variance efficient.
I think that's sort of the idealized
way that economists talk.
We know that in fact,
none of us, probably,
really have a truly mean
variance efficient portfolio.
So that's a bit of a stretch,
but as a thought experiment,
it certainly works out.
And then, another point they make, and
this is often how it's presented
in a finance class here at Wharton.
Which is that if, now here's another if,
that's not as big an if
as the previous one.
If everybody can borrow, or lend,
at the risk-free rate, all right?
Everybody can borrow or
lend at the risk-free rate, more or less.
Then you can show that,
ultimately, It's optimal for
everybody to hold risky assets in
the same proportional weights and
then just lever up or
down depending on how risk
averse they are using the risk-free rate,
right?
So if you're very risk averse then you'd
put a little bit in the risky assets and
a lot in the risk-free rate.
If you really want risk,
then you're going to borrow a lot at the
risk-free rate, you're going to lever up.
Borrow money at the risk-free rate and
then lever way up and
put a huge amount of money
in the risky assets.
But the point is that you can see
that it's optimal in fact for
everyone to hold the same portfolio
of risky assets in the same proportional
weights and then just lever up or down.
Okay, once again,
this is something you can look up.
I'm not going to try to prove that now,
it will take way too long.
But for
our purposes the point is that, okay,
if everyone's holding the same assets in
the same weights, then everyone's holding
once again by that same logic,
the value-weighted market index.
They're all holding
the value-weighted market index,
just sort of in different amounts, but
it's always the same relative weights.
Okay, so
the point is when I say take the valuated
market index,
being an efficient portfolio,
this is a position that's defensible.
Both of the arguments I gave obviously
are approximate, because we know
that they're not exactly true statements
about people and how they invest.
But they're approximate, and
economists learn to live
with close enough, okay?
So we're not saying that
the value-weighted market
index is going to be exactly
mean variance efficient, but
you can argue that it could easily
be in the neighborhood of it, okay?
So that's one reason to take
the value-weighted market index
to be an efficient portfolio.
Another reason, which is very
different reason, is that an index
is generally going to be
much cheaper to trade,
cheaper to trade then individual assets.
Okay, now when I see this I'm thinking
of the work of another famous economist,
his name is George Ackerlof, and
he is professor at Berkeley.
And he wrote a very famous paper,
the 1970,
for which he also won the Nobel Prize.
And this is a paper he called
The Market for Lemons.
So take a look at, it's one of the most
famous papers in all of economic, and
it's written very clearly.
And what he's saying very clearly
in that paper is that when you and
I want to trade and you know that I
have private information about the thing
that we're trading, that is going
to make you nervous, all right?
And what he shows in the paper is that,
he tells this in the context of used cars,
right?
I've got a car, I drive it around.
I know things about it, you don't.
You know that I know things
that you don't know, right?
And he shows how the market could
completely evaporate all due to
the fact that you worry about whatever
price you might offer the car.
You worry about what would it mean, if I
were to accept the price that you offered?
What would that mean about what I
really know about the car, okay?
So he's writing about cars, but
people appreciated that this
point applies anywhere.
It applies in any context where we're
trading something where one of us might
have private information, okay?
So just take Dr. Ackerlof's point and
think about it in the context now,
of putting on a portfolio that
the robo-advisor has proposed, right?
If the portfolio of individual stocks,
then every time you go to buy
one of those individual stocks,
the person on the other
side of the trade is going to wonder
why are you buying the stock.
Might you know something
that I don't know.
Maybe, maybe not, right?
The person on the other
side has to defend against
the possibility that you are trading
due to some private information.
And therefore is going to
charge you a transactions cost.
He's going to charge you what we call in
the profession, a bid ask spread, right?
If you're buying,
he's going to charge you a price higher
than you would get if you sold, right?
That's the bid ask spread, okay?
So the point is that individual assets,
especially the more obscure it gets,
like the smaller the company it is,
the more the other side is going to
charge you just to trade the asset.
Okay, so that's what it's like to try to
put on a position in individual assets.
But what if you're
trading the whole index?
What if you're trading
the whole index at once, okay?
I'm not buying each of
the 500 stocks in the S&P,
I'm just buying the S&P
index from somebody else.
Well, now that worry is
going to be far smaller.
Okay, when I'm buying
the S&P 500 index from you,
you're probably worrying a lot less.
What do I know about the whole
index that you don't know?
I might know something, right?
I might know something, I might be
the chair of the Federal Reserve, and
maybe I do know something that you
don't know the way the market's going.
And actually here's a fun fact,
who is George Ackerlof married to?
Janet Yellen, who was the chair
of the Federal Reserve, right?
How's that for
a power couple there, right?
So what George Ackerlof is
telling us about trading
is try to trade in a way that
the other side can see that
you're probably not trading
on private information.
And you're going to get better
transactions costs, okay?
So trade of the index
versus the individual
assets is going to be
cheaper in the long run.
You're not going to have money going
out the window from your portfolio in
transactions cost if you're trading
the index versus trade individual stocks,
like not nearly as much, okay?
So you can have an optimizer that
optimizes over individual assets.
Or you could just take the value-weighted
index to be your optimal portfolio.
You can also take a middle road here,
kind of a hybrid approach,
where your optimizer is optimizing
over individual assets.
But the assets themselves
that it's optimizing
over are index portfolios, okay?
So the S&P could be one of those
indices that goes into the optimizer.
There could be the indices for
other countries, right?
One for Canadian stocks, one for
Mexican stocks, one for Chinese stocks.
And you could have
different asset classes.
One for Internet stocks, one for
energy, one for cars, and so on.
So you have indexes that you're
optimizing over so that way maybe you can
get what you feel is a little more
diversification benefit than you're
getting from just buying
the value-weighted index of everything.
But still when you're putting
on the actual trades that
the robo-advisor is telling you to make,
you are trading at kind of reduced
transactions costs that you get
from trading the index versus
the individual assets, okay?
So in the next lesson,
we'll talk about how it is you can
actually go about trading these indices.